Periodontium and Oral Health
The periodontium is a crucial structure that supports and maintains the health of our teeth.
It consists of various components, each playing an essential role in oral health.
Components:
Cementum:** This hard tissue covers the root of each tooth.
It helps anchor the tooth in place by providing a surface for the periodontal ligaments to attach.
Cementum plays a vital role in tooth stability and is essential for tooth repair following minor injuries.
Periodontal Ligaments:** These fibrous tissues are responsible for anchoring the teeth to the alveolar bone.
They absorb the forces exerted during chewing and provide necessary cushioning, helping
to prevent damage to both the teeth and the surrounding bone structure.
Alveolar Bone:** This portion of the jawbone forms the socket that holds the teeth.
Alveolar bone not only supports the teeth but also undergoes continual remodeling
in response to the stresses placed on it through chewing and other
activities.
Functions:
Provides Stability:** Together, the cementum, periodontal ligaments, and alveolar bone form a strong foundation
that keeps teeth securely in place while allowing for slight movements necessary for normal
function.
Protects Teeth from Stress:** The periodontal ligaments absorb and dissipate the forces generated during activities such as chewing and biting.
This protective mechanism helps to prevent damage to the teeth and surrounding structures.
Detects Pressure During Chewing:** The periodontal ligaments contain specialized nerve endings that sense pressure and tension.
This sensory function allows for the awareness of biting force, helping
to prevent excessive pressure that could lead to tooth or jaw
injury.